♪ I am here for all to see ♪
♪ In my bones there's dignity ♪
♪ I will fight them ♪
♪ I can say that I can change the world ♪
♪ But if you let me ♪
♪ I will make my world stand tall ♪
♪ Let me show you one last time ♪
♪ Let me show you one last sign ♪
♪ I can see it all ♪
Medici! Medici! Medici!
--Cosimo! Cosimo!
- Piero!
- Lucrezia!
A hero's welcome!
The Medici name's
never been more popular.
We couldn't be in a better position
to reclaim what's ours.
There is the small matter
of Rinaldo Albizzi.
It seems the Signoria
are baying for blood.
Then he will be hanging from a yardarm
by the week's out.
In fact, his tailor
is just across the square.
- We can inquire about his neck size.
Medici! Medici! Medici!
Your luggage is getting more attention
than you, brother.
Of course it doesn't hurt
that she is Helen of Troy.
What's your point?
I'm just wondering how you intend
to explain the presence of Maddalena.
She's likely to attract an eye or two.
-Both of them belonging to Contessina.
-I don't intend to explain a thing.
-So she'll be a normal slave then?
-She'll have her duties.
I bet she will.
-It's a little early for bells.
-It must mean Cosimo's returned.
-We must speed up our preparations.
-Yes.
- Aw.
- Sorry, Monna.
Not this dress.
Great to see you.
- How's your father?
- Very well.
Lovely.
Cosimo.
Contessina.
How was your journey?
Long and dusty,
with little of importance worth sharing.
Of course.
Donatello's sculpture
you've commissioned has arrived.
Cosimo? Come and look at this.
Monna.
-I've missed you.
-You look so well. You really do.
-Do I?
-Yes.
You should have seen the crowds
in the square. There were so many.
There were hundreds of them
all chanting our names.
I couldn't believe it. It was amazing.
-You should go and unpack.
-Yes. I miss my room so much.
-It'll certainly be a talking point.
-It's beautiful.
And a sign of things to come.
It should be in the courtyard
for everyone to see.
Now that I am back, art will once again
be the language of Florence.
Here.
Welcome into the Medici home.
I know that look.
Don't worry. I'll watch out for you.
Signor Guadagni, have a seat.
The Signoria were ecstatic
you heeded their call for your return.
Trade is already on the up.
The moment they heard the Medici
were back in Florence,
shipments of wool
and silk began pouring in.
What of Albizzi?
He brought the republic
to the brink of ruin.
Tried to overthrow democratic rule.
Where is he now?
In the same tower
where he once had you imprisoned.
You should know the call
for his execution is unanimous.
Even his friend Pazzi has changed sides.
The Signoria are greatly looking forward
to your return. Ballot willing, of course.
Thank you, Signor Guadagni.
Your support means a great deal.
Thank you. And... welcome back.
--Oh. One more thing.
The mercenaries...
They've ruined this city.
The few that remain refuse to leave.
Father.
Perhaps the Medici name
could convince them to go.
So, if you would allow,
I'd like to speak to them myself.
And leave with a sword in your belly?
I think not.
There were so many lovely materials
in Venice.
You should have seen the silks.
Although, cloth isn't the only
beautiful thing we returned with.
-A gift for you, mama.
-Thank you.
It seems you brought
many beautiful things back.
With the Signoria calling
for Albizzi's head,
it seems his death is inevitable.
The man murdered my father.
Now Florence seeks vengeance
for what he's done to her.
Our paths entwine in this justice,
as they shall in rebuilding our fortunes.
Speak freely, my friend.
It's just...
might it be possible
that another took your father's life?
-You know something?
-Only that poison is a coward's mistress.
Say what you will of Rinaldo.
The man's no coward.
It is imperative Lorenzo and I
know for certain.
-Time is running short.
-Save a confession from the man's lips.
I fear solid evidence
will be hard to find.
Find what you can. And report back.
- I said I'm not hungry.
- Eat.
You should keep your strength up.
I know how cold
this cell can get at night.
If you've come to gloat,
take your fill and leave.
I take no pleasure in seeing you here.
-Why would you care?
-We were friends once.
You sacrificed our friendship
many years ago, Cosimo.
I have the scars to prove it.
It's not like you haven't had
your revenge.
Have I?
What do you want, Medici?
You want me to call off the mercenaries?
They take no orders from me.
On the contrary,
they'll be first in line for my head.
I owe them wages.
Leave.
There can be no peace between us.
Then it is settled.
It appears so.
How am I doing?
Fine.
I can't shade.
Can't I draw something more interesting?
If an apple doesn't delight you,
find something that does.
Just not me.
Emilia, leave us.
--You lied to me.
I'm sorry, mama.
It's not that I didn't want to tell you.
But you must understand
it was a difficult situation.
A difficult situation?
Oh, well, my apologies.
I am humiliated in my own home
and you stand by and say nothing?
-It wasn't my place to tell you.
-And whose place was it?
My husband's? Please...
How is it that my whole family
has returned,
yet I feel more alone than ever?
She's just a distraction, nothing more.
My husband takes no interest
in distractions.
I heard that you visited our old friend.
How is he enjoying his time in the tower?
I'm sure the lamps burning
in the Medici palazzo
have spoiled the view.
Being jailed for treason
and facing execution
hasn't lessened
the man's stubborn sense of pride.
So put him out of your head.
The Signoria will take his soon enough.
He is a reminder of the
constant battle we Medici need to fight.
Lorenzo!
You must find a wife of noble blood soon.
I know your heart still aches for Rosa,
but our enemies continue to circle us
even with Albizzi gone.
Fortifying our family is a necessity
you can no longer ignore.
This is a little bit sudden.
Perhaps you'd like to wait
another decade or two?
I have taken the liberty of scouting
a suitable bride.
Her name is Ginevra Cavalcanti,
a known beauty.
Her family is not a wealthy one,
but their noble lineage is impeccable.
Hmm. Well, it sounds like
I have little say in the matter,
just as you did in yours, Cosimo.
Contessina has invited
the Cavalcanti family
to the banquet tonight.
You will have your say.
Has it been lost on you
how much you sound like our late father
with each passing day?
Bless me, Father.
When was your last confession?
-I'm here for advice, not for confession.
-But you have sinned.
Many times.
But this is not for what I have done.
Rather what I have not.
I have uncovered a great sin.
Yet, if I speak openly,
it will set two brothers
against each other.
Are you certain of this sin?
I have searched for another answer
and have nothing
but blistered feet to show for it.
You must be cautious.
To take on one man's sin
against another is no small thing.
In the end,
it's God who rights every wrong.
-Ormanno!
-You must come with me.
Your Holiness.
Arise, please.
So it is true?
Duke Visconti has marched upon Rome?
I had to flee the city.
Thank the Lord, word came to us,
and we could save you in time.
And I shall be eternally grateful
to your family.
Yet now I must impose upon another.
May I presume upon your hospitality?
Would you accept me
as a guest in your home?
-I can think of no greater honor.
-Your Holiness...
Ormanno, I cannot stay in the house
of a man on trial for treason.
At least not until he is acquitted.
My father's reverence for you
knows no bounds, Your Holiness.
He will be most upset when I tell him.
Then he shall hear it from me personally.
As if I don't have enough to deal with,
with tonight's dinner.
I wish you would give me some warning
when God's representative
on Earth comes to stay.
I wish God would give me
some warning,
but it seems
this was unexpected for us both.
Surprises seem to be your forte
at the moment.
You haven't spoken to me at all
about the year we've spent apart.
Is your next grand reveal
letting your wife into the specifics,
or do you intend
to hold your peace forever?
- Contessina, I have been busy.
- So have I!
Running this household.
Our affairs for an entire year.
Oh, I took the liberty of removing
the more ostentatious artwork
from His Holiness' rooms.
You know his reputation for austerity.
And his condemnation of slavery.
Which wouldn't have been a problem
until recently, would it?
What would possess you to bring
a slave girl back from Venice?
What would possess you
to send me into exile?
I risked everything in saving you.
And this is how you repay me.
You thought you were a martyr.
But you were nothing
but a child with a paper sword.
Have I not done enough now to prove
that I put this family first?
Had I the choice again,
perhaps I would let you die.
Excellent. I'll send for some more hens.
Lay out some clean robes
for the Pope to change into.
-Of course.
-Actually, Emilia, wait a moment.
You there.
What's your name?
-It's Maddalena, Madonna.
-I have a job for you.
Emilia, on second thoughts,
you can go to the market
and procure the items on this list.
Maddalena. Go to my husband's room.
Gather some plain robes,
and then lay them out for His Holiness.
I assume you already know the way.
Staying with the Medici would send
the wrong message, Your Grace.
He corrupts God's order with money,
raising the unworthy to power,
all to the aid of his own fame and wealth.
And you are accused of attempting
to overthrow the city of Florence.
Tell me how that is different
to what is happening in Rome?
The fate of the city hangs in the balance.
As we speak, all that stands between
the Colonna family and the Curia
is Bishop Vitelleschi.
I thank you for Ormanno rescuing me,
and I value our friendship.
But surely you can appreciate
one cannot be particular
in gathering one's allies
at a time like this.
Cosimo de' Medici
and Florence stand against my enemies.
And so I stand with them.
I do understand your position,
Your Holiness.
But heed my words:
Cosimo will act as a friend,
until you find his knife in your back.
Thank you, Maddalena.
I'd like to thank Cosimo
for this wonderful meal,
and for recognizing these present families
for their support of the Medici
during their time in exile.
- Long, long to the life Medici!
- Thank you.
I see you are getting acquainted
with the lovely Ginevra.
Am I to assume she is
a good conversationalist after all?
-Her bust is particularly articulate.
-Well, her father is...
keen to see it in a safe pair of hands.
For the Medici, brother.
My daughter seems quite taken
with Lorenzo.
- And Lorenzo with her.
But what of this special guest
I've been hearing about?
I see none worthy of such--
Stand. Please.
Your Holiness, my apologies.
Fresh robes were meant to be
laid out for you.
No apologies necessary, my dear.
Robes were laid out,
and most fine they were.
But I prefer simpler garb.
Your Holiness.
I came to inquire
as to how you are settling in.
Very well.
And I must thank you for your hospitality.
I can see that banking has been kind.
Your home is palatial.
We try to steward our wealth
in a godly manner.
-Forgive me, you were in prayer.
-Yes. For the life of a friend.
Rinaldo Albizzi.
I thought you might be praying
for your swift return to Rome.
I've known Rinaldo for years.
He may be hot-headed,
but he is a good man.
With respect, it wasn't long ago
he was calling for my head.
Now the Signoria demands his.
The mandate for us to rule among ourselves
is a gift from God.
Yet man has a tendency to mistake
God's justice for revenge.
You believe he should be shown mercy?
You must implore the Signoria
to grant him exile.
It is impossible.
They will fear he will only bide his time,
simply to rise up and take the city.
Not if you draw up a contract
for Albizzi to sign,
swearing to remain in peaceful exile.
The Signoria will never trust Albizzi
to hold to such a contract.
Least of all Andrea Pazzi.
-He seeks Rinaldo's seat on the council?
-He's a natural politician.
Pazzi was once Rinaldo's closest ally.
Now he demands his execution
to send a strong message.
Then a contract will do little good.
-At least feign dismay.
-It is not I baying for Albizzi's blood.
-Nor do you intercede on his behalf.
-You ask too much.
This church has made
your family's wealth possible!
I expect you to behave
in the same godly manner
in which you decorate your homes.
You could put your name to the contract.
-Mine?
-If you were to countersign,
then I believe the Signoria would trust
Albizzi to hold to the agreement.
It is a noble thought.
But I cannot sign such a letter
whilst blood is spilt in Rome
by the same sort of tyranny
of which Rinaldo is accused.
There must be another way
to save his life.
Signor Cavalcanti.
-Good to see you,.
-Thanks.
Gentlemen!
Gentlemen,
we're here today to set the date
of Rinaldo Albizzi's sentencing.
- If I may speak...
If anyone has a right
to demand Rinaldo's death, it is me.
And yet I say otherwise.
Our great republic
was on the verge of tyranny.
So why not make our next act one of mercy?
A statement of intent?
I say we grant exile, not death.
Coward!
Albizzi...
was a tyrant.
A tyrant that brought the sword
to this city.
And now Medici, Medici asks for mercy.
I say we show no mercy.
I say we bring the sword to his neck.
Yeah!
Messer Cosimo will tire of you
soon enough, you know?
Give it a few weeks.
Then you'll just be a slave.
Your knees will be covered in hard skin.
Your hands will lose their softness.
And your beauty will fade within weeks.
-Trust me.
-Just like you?
Maddalena.
What are you doing?
-You've been sitting out there for hours.
-My art studies.
No, you can't see them.
They're not finished yet.
-Is it of me?
-No.
Drawing the elderly
is next week's assignment.
Isn't the cathedral beautiful?
Even in its unfinished state.
Is art ever finished
or is it merely abandoned?
I feel it is not time
to abandon this one just yet.
And I'm planning to resume construction.
I would be in your debt
if you were to anoint the works.
With your blessing, someone like Albizzi
would not be able to stop it again.
Tomorrow a man will lose his life.
And yet foremost in your mind
is the completion of a building.
What can I do?
The Signoria spat in my face,
Rinaldo slapped my hand away.
All I can do is let nature
take its course.
A man determined to die
should be allowed to run headlong
into his own sword.
Standing aside and washing your hands
does not remove culpability.
Then with respect, Your Holiness,
we have our hands in the same basin.
For the speck in your eye,
I miss the plank in my own. You're right.
It is a risk.
And there are those
that would use it against me.
But I will put my name to the contract.
Your Holiness.
You carried this here with your own hand?
Under no threat of harm?
It is a fair offer.
Cosimo assures me that this could sway
the Signoria in favor of exile.
An assurance
from the great Cosimo de' Medici.
-Find me a quill.
-I want to help.
Your Grace.
The leash you think is in your hand
is around your neck.
Can't you see his game?
I'll wager this contract was his idea
from the start, poured into your ear.
I think anger is clouding your judgment.
Remember to whom you speak.
Forgive me, Your Holiness.
I will say no more.
Save that the Medici lie.
It's in their blood.
Like his father before him,
Cosimo will destroy as many lives
as necessary to climb into power.
I will never sign this contract.
Rinaldo Albizzi has shown his true colors.
His refusal to sign this generous offer
proves that he is a threat to our liberty.
Yes!
Exile would be nothing more
than a gift of time
to raise an army
and lay siege to Florence.
Death to Albizzi! Death to Albizzi!
How did that contract get into your hands?
-The Signoria have a right to know.
-How?
Son... Ormanno.
Our home will still be here when I'm gone.
Keep your mother safe. Hm?
All I wish...
is to see you grow old, Father.
To see you hold your first grandchild.
To see me make you proud.
That day passed long ago.
Get off me!
-- Unhand her! Now!
- In the name of the Medici!
- Medici?
--Well, why didn't you say?
Your name carries no weight here.
-Medici.
-And that of Albizzi does?
Your paymaster is ruined and powerless.
We are staying here
until we get what we deserve.
Which is a hell of a lot more
than Albizzi was offering.
Why don't you take that back
to your father?
And we won't gut you yet.
You went behind my back
and confronted them alone?
Yes.
Good.
Now let's face them together.
It seems simple to me.
My paymaster is locked up in jail,
soon to be executed.
And so you see,
as de facto leader of this city,
you shoulder the burden of his debt to us.
Plus a little extra for our trouble.
Otherwise,
who can say what my men might do?
Get us 1000 florins.
And we'll be gone by eve tomorrow.
That's a lot of money.
Leave us.
And you.
Swapping charcoal for a needle?
It doesn't seem a good trade.
I do what's necessary.
-You're very good with that.
-Have you come to make fun of me?
Not at all.
That's not bad.
Although I think I look better than that.
Where is this going, Marco?
You and me, we are the same.
I just want you to know
that you are not alone.
Thank you.
You have a friend here.
Even if the Medici tire of you.
I'm paying the mercenaries
a thousand florins. To leave.
I hear you are attempting
to pardon our enemy.
If it's blood you're after,
you'll be pleased to know that
despite my very best efforts,
it is likely Rinaldo will die.
And you will let
the Signoria rule over you?
Why are you shutting me out?
Was it such an unforgivable treason
to have saved your life?
I was alone here,
at the mercy of Albizzi's thugs.
And yet I still did everything I could
to secure your return.
My God, I even spied for you.
While you were away delighting
in all that Venice has to offer.
You're in no position to judge me, woman.
Considering your flirtation
with Ezio Contarini.
Yes, I flirted with him.
He even asked me to go away, but I didn't.
I stayed for our family. I stayed for you!
You want me to thank you?
That was your duty as my wife!
What of your duty as my husband?
Order! Order!
Silence! I said order!
The hour is here.
We must weigh Rinaldo Albizzi
with the scales of justice
and decide his punishment.
Signor Guadagni.
May I address the chamber?
I have had the honor of spending
the last few days
with the first true holy man
I have ever met.
Pope Eugenius.
Driven from Rome,
seeking protection here in Florence,
knowing that we are a city
that prides itself on mercy and grace.
And yet since his arrival here,
I has been forced to ask myself
whether that reputation is deserved.
Or whether we have lost something.
Despite fleeing for his life,
dressed in rags,
his first concern upon arriving
in this city was not himself,
but of his friend,
Rinaldo Albizzi.
That we show this man mercy.
The very same mercy that Christ showed us.
As Jesus said:
"Let he who is without sin,
cast the first stone." So I ask...
Who are you to cast that stone?
Who are we to take this man's life?
- Exile!
This doesn't erase the past, Medici.
You think that by saving me,
you've saved your soul?
If you were wise, you will not return.
Do not force my hand.
Cosimo.
There's something else I need to tell you.
We are gathered here today
to bless the continued work
on this holy place.
A fragrant offering to our Lord
by his humble servant,
Cosimo de' Medici.
Its glory will stand through the ages.
An eternal monument
to the majesty of our creator,
Almighty God.
Let us lift our thoughts
to the Lord above,
he who breathed upon dust,
giving us the precious gift of life,
trusting us to rule
-his creation with fairness and mercy.
-Cosimo...
There's something else I need to tell you.
Ormanno! This way! Follow me!
Follow me, follow me!
I hear your father died a painful death.
Poison's like that...
Tends to stick in the throat.
-You know.
-Of course I know.
And now I'm freed by your hand,
it will worm its way into your mind.
A maggot crawling its way
through your flesh.
Maybe I killed your father.
Oh, God Almighty,
bless our generous benefactor,
Cosimo de' Medici.
A man who chose the hard and narrow path.